[dxm-362] add docs for @cacheTag (#3353)
apollographql/federation: docs/source/schema-design/federated-schemas/reference/directives.mdx

</tbody>
</table>

## Managing cache invalidation

### `@cacheTag`

<MinVersionBadge version="Federation v2.12" />

```graphql
directive @cacheTag(format: String!) repeatable on FIELD_DEFINITION | OBJECT
```

Assigns cache tags to cached data in the Apollo Router for [active cache invalidation](/graphos/routing/performance/caching/response-caching/invalidation#active-invalidation). Use cache tags to remove specific cached entries on demand when data changes, rather than waiting for time-to-live (TTL) expiration.

```graphql {7-8}
extend schema
  @link(url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/federation/v2.12",
        import: ["@key", "@cacheTag"])

type Query {
  users: [User!]! @cacheTag(format: "users-list")
  user(id: ID!): User @cacheTag(format: "user-{$args.id}")
}

type User @key(fields: "id") @cacheTag(format: "user-{$key.id}") {
  id: ID!
  name: String!
}
```

<Note>

The `@cacheTag` directive is defined in your subgraph schema, but it's only interpreted by the router—your subgraph doesn't use it at all. This differs from `@cacheControl`, which is both defined and interpreted at the subgraph level.

</Note>

> You can combine `@cacheTag` with `@cacheControl` to set reasonable TTLs as a safety net while maintaining the ability to invalidate data immediately when needed.

Reviewer: Can we link to the docs on `@cacheControl` here?

#### Arguments

<table class="field-table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Name /<br/>Type</th>
      <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

<tbody>

<tr class="required">
<td>

##### `format`

`String!`

</td>
<td>

**Required.** A string template that defines the cache tag. Can include interpolated variables:
- For root fields: `{$args.fieldName}` to interpolate field arguments
- For entities: `{$key.fieldName}` to interpolate entity key fields

> The `format` must always generate a valid string (not an object).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I think this is already implied by "A string template" in the description.

Examples:

* `"users-list"` (static tag)
* `"user-{$args.id}"` (root field with argument)
* `"product-{$key.upc}"` (entity with key field)

</td>
</tr>

</tbody>
</table>

#### Usage

> Apply `@cacheTag` to root query fields or entity types (types with `@key` where `resolvable` is unset or `true`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply `@cacheTag` to root query fields or entity types.
```
The stuff in parentheses looks like it's trying to describe entity types. I don't think we need to do that here.

```graphql
type Query {
  users: [User!]!
    @cacheTag(format: "profile")
    @cacheTag(format: "users-list")
}
```

**Entity key constraints:** If you have multiple `@key` directives, you can only interpolate fields present in _every_ `@key` directive:

```graphql
# ✅ Valid: 'id' is in both @key directives
type Product
  @key(fields: "id")
  @key(fields: "id sku")
  @cacheTag(format: "product-{$key.id}") {
  id: ID!
  sku: String!
}

# ❌ Invalid: 'sku' is not in all @key directives
type Product
  @key(fields: "id")
  @key(fields: "sku")
  @cacheTag(format: "product-{$key.sku}") {
  id: ID!
  sku: String!
}
```

**Nested fields:** You can access nested fields in entity keys, but the final value must be a scalar or enum type:

```graphql
# ❌ Invalid: country is an object
type Product
  @key(fields: "upc country { name }")
  @cacheTag(format: "product-{$key.country}") {
  upc: String!
  country: Country!
}

# ✅ Valid: country.name is a scalar
type Product
  @key(fields: "upc country { name }")
  @cacheTag(format: "product-{$key.country.name}") {
  upc: String!
  country: Country!
}
```

<MinVersionBadge version="Federation v2.13" />

> Enum types are supported in the `format` argument starting in Federation v2.13.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Fed 2.13 is not live... where is this information from? Is it coming in preview?

</Note>

#### Arguments

<table class="field-table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Name /<br/>Type</th>
      <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

<tbody>

<tr class="required">
<td>

##### `format`

`String!`

</td>
<td>

**Required.** A string template that defines the cache tag. Can include interpolated variables:
- For root fields: `{$args.fieldName}` to interpolate field arguments
- For entities: `{$key.fieldName}` to interpolate entity key fields

</td>
</tr>

</tbody>
</table>

<Note>

Enum types are supported in the `format` argument. If you encounter composition errors when using enums, use Apollo Router v2.8.2 or later, which includes a fix for enum validation.

</Note>

**Programmatic tags:** To set cache tags programmatically (when tags don't depend on root field arguments or entity keys), add `apolloEntityCacheTags` or `apolloCacheTags` to your subgraph response extensions. For details, see [Programmatic cache tags](/graphos/routing/performance/caching/response-caching/invalidation#by-cache-tag).

> For complete information on cache invalidation, including how to send invalidation requests to the router, see [Response cache invalidation](/graphos/routing/performance/caching/response-caching/invalidation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on how to apply cache invalidation with cache tags, see the documentation on [response cache invalidation](/graphos/routing/performance/caching/response-caching/invalidation#by-cache-tag).
```
Again don't want to repeat information already in the other doc so we can bundle both paragraphs into one here.
